[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am here with
jonathan height jonathan thank you so
much for joining me man um as i was
mentioning before we got started the
thing that draws me to you is
you seem truly committed to
understanding the way the human mind
works and that is my like core mission
in life largely for my own benefit if
i'm completely honest but um super
excited to get into that stuff with you
uh well thank you tom it's a pleasure to
be here um yeah i'm a psychologist i'm a
social psychologist and you know when i
learn stuff uh professionally i learn
about you know how the mind works i i
think like oh now i understand that
other thing or that other person um so
yeah if you want to talk about the mind
for uh for an hour i'm i'm there with
you
yeah so the reason that i'm so focused
on the mind in my own life is
so the the movie the matrix has become
the dominant metaphor in my life not
because i necessarily think we are
actually living in a simulation i
actually don't um partly i guess because
i don't find that
a very interesting framework with which
to approach the world so even if we are
i don't know how useful that is
but your brain is definitely creating a
um
a detached sort of virtual reality that
isn't about measuring the number of
photons that are reflecting off of an
object and landing on your eye which
would be like true objective reality at
least visually
it's trying to keep you alive and so
that can be at times really advantageous
and create a beautiful experience but it
can also be
very problematic at times and one of the
ideas that i found super intriguing
from you is the idea that we're 90
chimps and 10 bees um i'd love to know
more about like what does that mean to
you and how how do we use that as we
think about
constructing our own mindset or even
thinking about our minds okay all right
let's just let's jump into it um
so
um
so human beings are this really bizarre
species um we so i'm really interested
in sociality why are we so sociable and
there are there are a lot of species
that are social in this world that you
know deer are socially they run into
herds but it's not much sociality you
know herd is really just you know if
you're the slowest if you're the slowest
one you'll get eaten but if you're not
the slowest you won't get eaten by the
the lion chasing you um there are other
animals that are really sociable like
wolves and other dolphins that go in
packs uh and they cooperate
and then there are these animals like
bees and ants and wasps and termites
that are ultra social they live in these
gigantic collections and they can build
big things they can build hives that are
vastly bigger than they are
and so so uh biologists call this ultra
sociality and humans are actually
ultra-social we're able to live together
in gigantic groups we're able to
cooperate i never met you before we can
cooperate to do this and so a lot of a
lot of social scientists are interested
in this ultra-sociality
how do we do it what's our trick um in
all the other species that are
ultra-social the trick is they're all
descended from a single female they all
you know there's a queen who lays all
the eggs she's not the ruler she's just
the ovary so they're all siblings we do
it with people who are not related to us
they don't have to be similar one thing
i wanted to ask you because i've heard
you talk about that before is the logic
behind them being siblings meaningful
because of the um the selfish gene
hypothesis if we're more likely to okay
exactly yeah kin selection if you can't
reproduce on your own because almost all
of those other species are sterile so
they can only get into the next
generation the genes can only get to the
next generation if they keep the queen
alive if they you know if they if they
work for the good of the group so humans
have this weird sociality which is kind
of like
bees and ants but also we're really
selfish we're really selfish a lot of
the time it depends on the context and
so i've been really fascinated because i
study morality that's what i've always
done since since graduate school i study
morality and this weird corner of
morality is making things sacred
so can you define morality that's
actually something i've never stopped to
to think about like what definition
would you put to that
well morality is a feature of human
human thinking and judgment
just like we all have language and then
we create languages we live in a
linguistic environment
we all have norms we perceive norms we
co-create norms and then we enforce them
on each other and if you look at a group
of kids getting together to play a game
they'll quickly make up the rules and
it's really fun you can watch them
negotiating like no you're not allowed
to go over that line yes i am that's the
kitchen or whatever you know they just
their brains are sort of unfolding
they're playing with with norms um and
so as they play as they make norms well
in a sense
that's the matrix so if you remember
from the movie the matrix the matrix is
a consensual hallucination
and what's so cool about human beings is
that we're great at creating we
co-create a consensual hallucination and
then we live inside it and we enforce it
on each other
but
in a big complex society like ours
there are different groups making lots
of matrices that are not really fully
compatible so there's constant
misunderstanding constant conflict and i
think that can help us illuminate this
moment or any moment in human history
but my goodness our current moment
there's a lot of conflict a lot of
incoherence um a lot of misunderstanding
so i would like to just bring it all
back to this amazing ability humans have
um to uh to co-create norms
judge each other hate each other love
each other because of this
and that's the excitement and the
tragedy of our lives
it's it's interesting
when you start talking about the use of
temples and how religion has really
played a powerful role in this
so
i'm not religious i was actually growing
up so growing up i was raised lutheran i
would say very lightly it was a very
light touch
but i went through sort of a deeply
christian period in my life for a couple
of years and then i went through a
deeply the most sort of profound
pseudo-religious because it was probably
more philosophical if i'm completely
honest for me was taoism and i just went
hard on taoism self-identified as a
taoist almost got a tattoo like the the
whole thing it just it meant so much to
me and it really um began to to color
the way that i thought about the world
and then as i got older a lot of that
started to um fall by the wayside and
and i'm thinking through this in real
time it began to fall by the wayside to
what i'll call maybe the religion of
function so if i were
i think that the the human mind has a
need for something that's sacred and
literally i'm stealing this from you you
are the person that made that very clear
to me um
and the thing that that is sacred in my
life i won't even say that it was it
still is this is sort of the driving
thing in my soul that's sacred is the
ability to turn potential into usable
skills and that like transition is what
i'll say is my life's mission
and when you think about okay we have
something that's sacred we can all agree
on what that thing is and it allows us
to cooperate in ever bigger groups
you talk about the hive switch like
what exactly is that how do things
become sacred and then when you look at
a moment like now where
what is sacred is becoming i would say
potentially problematic how do we
navigate that
okay so let me back up and ask you a
question
uh so you know you say you got it from
me i got a lot of it from emil durkheim
the famous french sociologist and
durkheim analyzed religion not about
what you believe it's not about you know
reincarnation or you know or or you know
immaculate conception
he said it's about the community that
religion
its power and it and its function is to
bind a group together into into a church
or into a into a congregation or
community so your taoism period was that
just you reading books or were you part
of a group or a temple was it just an
intellectual thing for you
that is an amazingly good question that
i have never thought of until this very
moment it was my best friend um
introduced me to it first and so we
became sort of a a tribe of two if you
will um but no other than that there
there was nothing but it was a very it
created a deep sort of intellectual
intimacy between he and i that i really
cherished
okay so two is not quite enough for a
community or a group i'm gonna guess
that what it gave you was more a sort of
an intellectual opening that there's a
so i'm really interested in awe
experiences and i wrote a review paper
in 2003 with my friend deckard keltner
where we reviewed all these different
kinds of experiences people have
near-death experiences psychedelic drug
experiences spontaneous peak experiences
all kinds of religious experiences that
william james used to write about
a lot of them have the sense of of of a
kind of a shattering of old constructs
um a loss of boundaries of the self and
an almost ecstatic sense of opening
mystics
talk about it as merger with god or
merger with all durkheim talked about it
as actually merger with with with
everyone else he said
society is actually god
so
i'm going to guess that you had feelings
of just of like your concepts cracking
open and like wow
so that was more of a cerebral thing
a group of two probably is not enough to
have like a lifelong religion
that's just a guess am i totally off no
i mean that's super accurate and that's
probably part of why it became
it was either um just a transitional
thing for me to get into deep
functionality because that was um
or and let me finish that thought so it
was either a gateway to deep
functionality or it was that um not
being around him anymore it began to
sort of lose its hold on me because i
didn't have anybody to reinforce it um
but taking a um the first approach and
saying it was a bridge to something else
when i first started reading um the dao
de jing it was
this sense the like i'll encapsulate it
by be like water right so i was obsessed
with bruce lee i was obsessed with
taoism i'm reading the dao jit kundo
like all of this stuff about um in fact
bruce lee maybe um sums it up in in the
most interesting way where he says be
like water my friend and then if you
read his book
the tao of jeet kune do ji kundo
translates roughly as defend by
attacking and so there was there was
this transition from here's this
abstract philosophy that's telling you
to be like water but then it's
explaining why it's useful and so when
you think about water being able to
erode rock over millennia
it begins to plant all these ideas in my
head that i think wow there's like a
real world application of this and that
was very intoxicating and by bringing
that into my thought process and my
behavior
i felt
i wouldn't have used the words that
you're using the sense of ah but i
definitely would have said a sense of
opening up that there was a world which
i had known nothing about that i had a
reaction to or a potential for reaction
to laying dormant in my mind and someone
need only give me the text and in
reading the daodejing for myself i had
this emotion of like whoa there's there
are possibilities that i had not yet
understood and so that notion of you
know the doors of perception or whatever
opening was very profound beautiful
that's right and that's what i think a
lot of people you think back on your
college experience if you had a great
college or high school experience it's
that rare class or that rare professor
that made you suddenly see possibilities
that you did not see before and so when
i first began reading anthropology in
graduate school and reading
ethnographies of other cultures and
learning to think of culture in this way
it was like wow
um and when i first read emil durkheim
when he first took a sociology course
again in graduate school
again it was like these you know new
ways of thinking they're so powerful
okay so now we're ready to talk about
the hive switch so
um when i was a professor at the
university of virginia from 1995 to 2011
i was interested in all these all these
self-transcendent experiences and i
would collect you know stories about
near-death experiences and how people
described how it affected them all that
sort of stuff and
there were so many similarities like
there's all these different ways to get
to this self-transcendent experience
that i began to think it's almost so
there's like a button on the front of
your forehead where if you press it like
you sort of lose yourself and then you
have this whole suite this whole package
of experiences
part of which is
moral it's almost moral improvement that
is people who you know you're up on a
mountaintop this amazing experience you
don't come down the mountain saying i'm
so psyched to make as much money as i
can like no that doesn't happen it's
like i want to be useful to everybody i
i want to you know spread beauty i mean
you have a there's always kind of a
moral uplift so when you press the
button you lose yourself petty
selfishness declines and there's there's
sort of a spiritual growth or or a moral
elevation and so that's why i was
interested in all these people one thing
one thing i want to know about that so
earlier you
what i took away from your words on the
defining morality is that it is a
shared um
belief system and that it it felt as you
were talking about it and it feels an
experience quite frankly to be highly
malleable
so
when you say that you have this moral
elevation
what what is going on psychologically
and so that's a terrible question so
i'll step back and say i have a
hypothesis that there are what i call
the physics of being human
that the brain the brain is wired for
certain things yes uh is one of them
you've talked about the fact that we
have the hive switch is another so are
you talking about tapping into something
that's sort of innate to the human brain
that gives you a sense of connectedness
which you're calling elevation
absolutely that's exactly it um the key
book for me there were a couple of them
but the one i recommend to a general
audience is by barbara ehrenreich you
know she wrote nickel and dime she has a
lot of great books
she has a book called dancing in the
streets a history of collective joy
and she shows how
the normal default way that human groups
are religion is danced it's ecstatic
it's it's it's these really active
rituals and she shows how christianity
used to be like that too but gradually
and i think it was in the protestant
world much more than catholic and
protestant it becomes more sedate more
intellectual
less durkheimian
and
she says group love like the love that
you feel for your group is this powerful
common emotion around the world and
religious rituals often instill it and
somehow we in this sort of modern
secular west
have much staler you know now obviously
there's many different forms of
protestantism some are more ecstatic and
those are generally the ones that are
growing
so
yes this is a default normal healthy
capability of the human mind and modern
western society doesn't satisfy it as
much as
traditional many traditional societies
and therefore
her point is people do all these things
to seek out that pleasure and that helps
you understand she goes through raves
like you know when
you know in the 1980s when uh you know
really powerful speakers and laser
lights and then also the drug ecstasy
which had been around for 80 years or
more but they all came together people
found a way to create this group
experience that like pressed all the
buttons and a lot of people would have
these transformative uh experiences not
you know and again it's always this like
a moral growth as well so the idea is um
we have this ability it's not like like
a switch in the head you can push it and
all these amazing things happen they're
deeply pleasurable so i began calling
that the hive switch because even though
humans are primates we're a lot like
other you know chimpanzees bonobos where
those are our closest uh
you know other species we're a lot like
them in our social life
but we have this ability they have they
know nothing of which is to briefly
become like bees in a hive
we forget ourselves
we have this ecstatic merging that's
what i mean by the hive switch and
that's what what i find is when i
lecture about this and i ask people how
many have had an experience the majority
not not 90 but you know more than 50
percent have had something like this
nice have you something
tell me about one that you've had that
involved a group
um that involves a group so
the i think your group size is probably
i'm going gonna run into a problem with
that the the group experience that i do
that i have the biggest reaction to
because you're gonna think this is uh
silly but um
my wife my sister and i play a game
called destiny on the playstation and we
play as a team so i'm i am to your point
i am only interested in cooperative
games so um i
i play where i can play as a part of a
team and we i mean essentially simulate
war right without the real world
violence and the real consequences and
as you've talked very eloquently about
like people that go to war and survive
and come back in one piece often talk
about it as sort of the peak experience
of their life and so in a really really
really small way i get that from playing
that game now of course having gone to
usc and going to football games or quite
frankly and hey this will be i'm going
to grab the [__] third rail right now
um growing up as a kid in the 80s in
america felt awesome to be american like
it felt [__] awesome and i used to
say all the time like to so i have a lot
of younger employees and i would say man
i wish you guys had that same kind of
experience of like man we were just like
it felt so good the movies coming out in
the 80s which of course wildly
influenced me you know arnold
schwarzenegger movies where it was just
like being an american being a badass
like standing up for what you believed
in like all of that [__] was just so rad
and that really intoxicated me um
that obviously has fallen out of fashion
in a hard way
but i still have that so i still like
when i think about sort of what's my
highest level group identity
being a person is rad and the moment the
moments where i have felt the best are
moments where you just feel connected so
when i was at quest in fact so i am
thinking out loud right now which is why
i'm sort of all over the place so thank
you for allowing me to think through
something i hadn't thought about um
but being at quest was a great example
of that i was suddenly in the mix of
people who grew up so differently than i
did
but we had this common mission a common
drive of self-improvement and that was
so awesome to making protein bars is
hard like fit it's physically demanding
especially in the beginning when we
didn't have industrial grade equipment
and so it's really really hard and being
with people fighting side by side for
this common mission and it is physically
difficult um you've talked about
muscular bonding so i'll say that was a
tremendous example of muscular bonding
if that answered your question no that
that really does that's beautiful
because the other book that i was going
to recommend is by the historian william
mcneil called keeping together in time
and he talks about how it's movement in
synchrony he begins with his story of
being uh when world war ii broke out i
don't know if he was drafted or he
volunteers but they're in basic training
marching around a field with fake wooden
guns
seems stupid but by the end of the first
or second day when his unit gets it and
they actually are moving in sync he
describes this ecstatic experience so
physically moving with a group
especially if you have a higher noble
mission you're pursuing together
which you know he did and which you did
that is a good way to unlock that so it
was physically hard you were doing
things at the same time
and you had a noble purpose in mind this
is also why say playing in in a band i'm
not a good musician at all but for a
year so i played with some other people
and like the first time we really got in
sync it was like nothing i'd ever
experienced so there's all these ways
there's all these potentials we have to
to i would say realize our our our deep
social nature that modern western
society often leaves frustrated
yeah the
when when i first started encountering
the idea that religion was um on the
wane i was actually excited about that
if i'm honest that just felt right to me
like going to reason instead of like
hardcore emotions
um
and i i read the power of myth by joseph
campbell from a filmmaker's perspective
is why i picked up the book um but then
i stayed for the transformation like it
really ended up impacting my life and he
started talking about how when the core
meaning behind a ritual falls away or
the ritual itself dies away there is
some sort of vacuum left and when i
think about what you're talking about
things needing to be sacred or there
will be something sacred like people
will put some elements and elevate them
to the status of sacred it's like all of
a sudden we had things that were
functioning you know have friction
against them or whatever fine but like
religion really
societies are here they're doing pretty
good um so when you remove that it
becomes a huge question of what's it
replaced with and i started to get
really unnerved and i would say this
moment in time is sort of the peak of my
fear over what happens if it gets
replaced with something less useful
that's right that's right so that's a
good lead-in i think to what's going on
going on nowadays um
so the other piece
the other piece that we have to put on
the table here
is social media we have to understand
what social media is doing to us before
we can understand the incoherence and
conflicts of our time
so
um
uh i teamed up i've always had i had a
sense that things began getting just
really weird in our country and our
democracy around maybe 2015. this is
before trump um
it was like there was a glitch in the
program it was like like the fundamental
you know parameters the universe had
changed
and
um and and the weirdness of
the weirdness
i i think allowed allowed donald trump
to have a campaign that never could have
worked previously but with his the way
he used social media it it did somehow
work
let's understand what social media has
done has done to us
um uh let's go back to the origins of it
around 2003 2004 you get friendster
myspace the facebook
these were sites where you put up
you know links to your friends or other
things about you or you know hear the
bands i like
totally not toxic okay it's just a way
to connect with people um
pardon me
and um
so i teamed up with with a guy named
tobias rose stockwell
who really knows the tech industry and
social media very well i'm a social
psychologist i'm on twitter a little bit
but i don't really understand the space
very well but tobias and i together so
traced out exactly how social media
changed between 2009 and 2012. that's
the period when the whole universe
changes
facebook ads the like button in 2009 and
now it's much more engaging and people
are rating each other you're reinforcing
reinforcement so it's much more engaging
twitter adds the retweet button
which makes things much more explosive
things go viral very quickly
a twitter engineer was involved in it i
think he said when he saw what was
happening he said something like i think
we just put a loaded gun in the hands of
a three-year-old it was something he had
a quote something like that
um so you get these two innovations and
each platform copies the innovations of
the other and they become features of
social media
and so now the platforms have a huge
amount of information about what you
like what you're engaged with and so now
they algo they even they've done it
before but they really algorithmicize
the fees so that you're not getting a
chronological you're getting what other
people or what they think you will be
more likely to engage with so social
media really changes between 2009 2011
2012 and then the mainstream media the
newspapers and the television stations
they now have to adapt because that's
where the action is things are going so
fast
so you get so our our information
ecosystem that used to it was always
fast but it now it goes to warp speed
lightning speed no time to check things
um it goes it's head spinningly fast
lots more untruth lots more manipulation
uh i think we kind of lose touch with
reality around this time around 2012
2013 is when the um uh
things begin to get particularly uh that
the the tech platforms have now set
things up
i want to i want to um
have you go deeper on that so because i
think this is going to end up being
important that the the fact that you're
saying we've lost touch with reality
tells me that you think and i certainly
do so correct me if you don't think this
but that there is an important part of
defining what reality is is the
reflection you get back from other
people and that's the part that ends up
getting wildly deranged by social media
um
yes i would say it a little differently
i would agree with what you said but let
me say it a little bit differently so
um
so if we return to the the metaphor the
matrix it's a consensual hallucination
um and there's a great line from the
sociologist max weber um
the gist of it is man is an animal
actually it's from clifford gear it's
quoting max favor man is an animal
suspended in webs of significance that
he himself has spun
and i take culture to be those webs
and so we're always spinning these webs
but what happens when social media comes
in and now
any you know somebody can spin a new web
in you know a matter of a day or you
know hours in a sense like
so so we have the technological
environment
hyperactivating our ability to spin new
webs of meaning
now let me just add one last element and
we'll put all together sorry if it seems
too didactic but no no no no i'm really
interested nowadays in the biblical
story of the tower of babel
so after humans you know humans all had
one language
and they're very powerful they're what
you know they're ultra social creatures
they can build towers they can build
giant hives and nests so they build this
tower
and god says look they become like they
become like gods
he says
let us go down and confound their
language so that they may not understand
one another
and i think that's what happened between
2009 and 2012.
we built this
enormous new
well outraged platform is tobias's word
for it we built this enormous new way of
communicating that allows people to spin
and manipulate and and express outrage
and draw people in
we built it and what did it do to us it
shattered any ability to have a common
language a common understanding what
happened so any big event happens
like with a pandemic just look at the
pandemic
[Music]
and what you you have is there can be a
common understanding for a few days
maybe even a week or two but pretty soon
different political elements foreign
actors are putting in conspiracy
theories or just twisting it and before
you know it
you know the basic science questions
questions of which side you're on
um now i don't want to do you know both
sides of them here like each side is
equal you know because obviously the
president tweeting
you know you know against his own team
and tweeting liberate virginia you know
liberate minnesota um obviously the
president politicized it greatly but
almost anything nowadays uh um
it's hard to find the truth and so i
think an implication of this is we have
to be a lot more intellectually humble
because it's just really hard to know
what the truth is but man we get plugged
into some reading some narrative and we
are certain we know what the truth is
and that tells us who's good and who's
evil
so it's a mess it is just a mess out
there and and you know i was began
thinking this way around 2015 like
something is weird with the
universe yeah i i am
i'm almost pathologically optimistic
to the point i've cultivated that myself
to be sure because i think that it's far
more useful and when i think about
entrepreneurs that succeed you really
are trying to do something that other
people think is impossible which is
largely why they haven't tried it um and
certainly quest was sort of the biggest
experiment in optimism in my life where
everybody told us what what are you
doing this doesn't make any sense
there's a reason that this bar doesn't
exist the number of people that told us
that it physically could not be made
and they were right except for the fact
if you're willing to build your own
equipment then you can produce it but
like people just don't even think to do
that right so it was this huge gamble
that we took ends up paying off and so
it's like okay cool yeah this idea of
being pathologically optimistic is
actually really powerful
this is the first time in my life where
i've been like whoa i'm actually i don't
know that i see the mechanisms by which
we unwind this
and so it becomes a question of you talk
about these webs of meaning i think
that's so powerful that's such a smart
way to think of this
and but my question becomes what the
hell makes one web of meaning so viral
and so sticky that it spreads so fast
and then the people that are creating
these webs like are they really smart
have they just happened upon something
um like what is it about
the human mind like what elements of the
human mind make a certain narrative
sticky and i i am intentionally taking
you to um the the
like moral foundation theory so if if
you don't think that's the right answer
let me know but that i had never heard
that before and when you enunciated it
like that where there's hey there's six
and once you understand these like you
can really begin to predict people's
behavior i was like oh my god
yeah so yeah so great so so yeah this is
the the problem that i've worked on
especially the first half of my career
um is
um
you know what you know what is morality
where does it come from and as i said
before i was just blown away when i
began studying anthropology about how
different we are but at the same time
you have weird stuff in the
anthropological record like you know
puritan pollution taboos you know you
find them in the hebrew bible around
menstruation you find similar things in
many other
societies that never met and so that
told me like wow it's like
you know for those of those of you who
know carl jung and his idea of
archetypes it's not a very scientific
concept but it gets the idea that some
very specific patterns will occur around
the world in societies that you know
were separated 50 000 years ago so
there's something about the human mind
that seems to generate or be receptive
to certain narratives certain pieces of
content and so this
led me and some some colleagues of mine
to develop a theory called moral
foundations theory and it draws heavily
on the the work of richard schweiter an
anthropologist at the university of
chicago
um and the analogy we used was our you
know our tongues have uh five different
kinds of taste receptor on them because
we evolved to eat fruit and meat and so
sweet and sour guides a primate to ripe
fruit and you know salt and bitter and
umami a kind of a meat flavor so we you
know we evolved to have these tongues
with specific receptors but that doesn't
tell us you know how you get mexican
cuisine versus indian cuisine that's
culture it's based on what's available
it's based on history so moral
foundations theories an attempt to put
it all together and say what are the
evolved taste receptors of the moral
sense
and then given that every person on
earth has the same receptors
why do we end up with different
moralities in different countries
originally but now even you know in the
same neighborhood you can
so briefly the the six are uh care so
you know care and harm and you know
compassion because we're we're mammals
and we evolve to
care for our young
um fairness
fairness reciprocity cheating because
we're very good at exchange and we have
to keep track of who's trustworthy
um
uh loyalty
um because we're
groupish creatures and we take keep
track of who's who's with us who's not
uh like your story about the the kid in
prison
um authority because we're hierarchical
creatures like most primates and we we
recognize signs of of authority which
can be abusive um
uh and then uh purity or sanctity we do
this stuff about investing objects with
this sacred essence and then you know if
you touch it you don't want to touch you
wash your hand so we have all this stuff
about purity and pollution um and those
are the main five that that we worked on
originally there's a bunch more the
other one that we're working on that i
think is extremely important for our
politics is liberty uh liberty versus
versus oppression
um and but there are several others i i
don't believe we have to have a small
set evolution didn't care about
parsimony didn't care about making
everything have one foundation but once
you understand this that we have all
these different moral taste receptors
now you can see how do you persuade
someone
if i want to persuade you of some
political issue if i want to pull you to
the left or the right or change your
thinking about race or the environment
you know i i could just give you data i
could say we'd all be better off if we
did x
that tends not to persuade people very
much but if i can tell you a story about
how those greedy bastards were doing
this to us and they took this and
they're doing that and we have to unite
to fight them okay now i'm hooking deep
into your narrative process or your
story thinking and i'm grounding it in
moral foundations
uh so so that's um
yeah that's like the psychology i would
put on the table here for us to now have
a conversation about why do some
why do some story constructions take off
and others sort of die on the vine
yeah it's interesting this is where it
gets really important to understand that
we're not blank slates that there are
people that are going to have receptors
that are
really optimized for one thing or
another
you talked about twin studies where it's
like the thing that predicts your sort
of right or left leaning has far more to
do with your genetics than even where
you grew up which i found interesting i
was actually really surprised by that
um
i'm not sure it has more total just that
almost everything about us
didn't you say in the book that it was
actually more predictive
uh well the correlations are well you
know if you look at the map of voting um
you know the red zones and the blue
zones you know where you grow up uh does
it does have a lot to do with certainly
what party you'll support
um but uh
but with how religious you are how
conservative or liberal um yes your your
genes do influence that quite a lot
and what would you say is more
influential is it more influenced by
genes or more influenced by your
surroundings
uh i can't i can't you know that's an
empirical question i don't have the data
hand i don't remember to the extent that
it's been i'm not sure i've seen it
quantified in any one
study
[Music]
how where you are on the left right
put it this way where you're on the left
right is what is heritable whether
you're a republican democrat is not the
heritable thing because the parties have
changed over time and you might be a
liberal republican or a conservative
democrat so party
um and certain specific beliefs would be
more influenced by where you grow up and
and your community is interesting this
gets into your tower of babel thing
where it's like it it begins to get hard
to pin them down because until you
started speaking 30 seconds ago i
considered the left democrat and the
right republican so the idea that those
actually need to be
parsed out is interesting and
and i think for a lot of people those
are sort of one and the same it's just
you know well for americans now they've
become one of the same but before the
90s they weren't so uh parties have
always been
um you know a whole assemblage of
interest groups and regions and
industries uh and you might say that one
party is more to the left or right than
another in american history but um
uh you know the the republican party
grew out of lincoln and you know the
party of lincoln in the civil war so the
south was therefore democrat and uh it
would you know so
um
that's back when there were liberal
republicans in the northeast in the
northwest they were conservative
democrats in the south um so if you had
to define then the difference between
liberal liberal and conservative
what words would you put to that
well
i prefer to think in terms of left right
because the word liberal
has a particular meaning
in
uh in the western world in europe and
america the liberal tradition is like
jon stewart mill
individual rights freedom of conscience
freedom of speech um and the word
liberal in europe means more like what
we mean but nowadays as a political
party as i understand it it's more like
what we mean by like libertarian so
um
america has taken the word liberal i
think this started in the early 20th
century and we've said the word liberal
means left so in america you say liberal
to conservative
but i think
but then if you talk to europeans they
understand the way that we use the word
i think it's better to talk about
progressive versus conservative some
people are just constitutionally
disposed to let's change things let's
progress let's change change change and
others like whoa not so fast like
there's a wisdom to traditions you know
so that's the normal tension that you
find i think in every society um
progressive versus conservative and that
generally is what we mean by left versus
right
and so so using those words that's
really interesting um
when you start thinking though about the
names you give things progress versus
anything seems like the other thing is
going to be the bad thing
um and it's funny i actually now at a
subconscious level like obviously i
don't believe this is actually true but
in terms of my own emotional response i
respond to um progressive conservative
republican democrat as if they were
slurs like i wouldn't want anybody
putting any of those labels on me they
become so divisive
um and it's become so formulaic right
that if you say that you're a
conservative then you're gonna line up
on issues that way just to be a part of
the team right so going back to that
hive mind i feel like i agree we have
this switch this hive mind switch
somebody's [__] got their boot on it
and people just cannot get back to the
the 90 percent um yeah i'll even stray
away from chimp and just say 90 mammal
like just you know nurturing and and
caring about other people and wanting to
understand and like to listen it just
seems super
weird so anyway you you've got one word
being used for progressive which seems
to set up sort of an inherent conflict
uh when you say conservative
at least in my own mind and i meant to
ask you this when we were talking about
the tower of babel how much of this do
you think is the actual
words are what are being manipulated the
definitions of the words are changing
versus just making it impossible for
people to to tell the same narrative
um you know i think part of part of
attempts at political change is to
control the language redefine words
um put out images so it's hard it's hard
to say we'd have to talk about a
specific specific case
um the one thing i'll add is just that
the data from the pew surveys shows that
if you go back to the 90s if you were on
the left let's say you would believe
certain kinds of issues but you wouldn't
be orthodox like you wouldn't have all
ten
and same thing on the right like there
used to be people would sort of have a
mismatch they'd have a bunch of
different issues on both sides and
gradually since then if you know that
someone is on the left or the right you
actually you're more likely to know
their position on all 10 of the issues
that pew surveys so there has been and i
think this is related to
possibly in part to to the the new media
environment just the the policing we do
of each other now the policing we can do
with people's views and the penalties
for for thinking for yourself or for
stepping off or saying well you know i i
hold this view on that but this view on
that
so i think it is making it harder for us
to think straight because you have to
kind of buy into a whole package and
there can be penalties for stepping off
the you know stepping off the little
zone of agreement
yeah for sure the one word that i'll say
if we were going to pick one to be an
example of how changing the definition
seems to have created problems and and
this is where i'm saying this to you
before we started filming i don't
consider myself to have deep wisdom here
i have a way of thinking
that has certainly served me well and so
i use it to process through this stuff
but racism to me is a word that seems to
have changed definitions to our
detriment and where um change is maybe a
better word for progressive than
progressive because you're not always
changing in the right direction so
to me like i always say that everything
is an echo of your goal what's your goal
so my goal at least as it pertains to
race would be to get to the point where
race is about as interesting as hair
color it's like you can see it sure like
nobody's obviously not going to be able
to tell but you just don't factor it in
terms of thinking about whether
somebody's worth um worthy of love or
promotion or that their ideas are good
or you know you just i mean to be judged
by the content you character but that's
actually become like an eye-rolly thing
to quote
um that notion of you know judge
somebody by the content of their
character and to make the term racism to
be more about sort of intrinsic
qualities
that have to do with power dynamics
seems
like it is a web of meaning that has
become extraordinarily sticky but seems
to be like where we almost can't even
have the conversation because it's like
well i don't agree with the definition
and
when you get into it's what i call a
base assumption if you're having an
argument so
my poor audience has heard me explain
this so many times but this will help
you understand how i'm thinking
the biggest argument i ever got into
with my wife is over a cup of tea
and so we're just in this huge fight
over this cup of tea and finally about
two hours in i was like this is not
about the tea what is this actually
about like what there's no way i could
get this heated about a cup of tea so
what are we really talking about and
then when you get to base assumptions
that's where it's like yo getting people
to change their base assumption can be
really [__] difficult and speaks to
those the flavor receptors and who has
more of one and you know it is leaning
in a certain direction so
are you still pessimistic about how we
move forward are you optimistic about
how we move forward specifically in at
that sort of base assumption like
religious fervor
level right okay so let's let's okay
this is this is tricky let's try to talk
about this about about the changing
definition of of racism
so you and i i mean more i was born in
1963 i was born uh you know two months
after martin luther king's i have a
dream speech and you know the the late
20th century in the united states was a
time of extraordinary progress
on uh you know
civil rights women's rights uh gay
rights now lgbtq um animal rights you
know the environment so
it was an extraordinary period the late
20th century and our our ideal then was
as you said
you know the the king quote about the
content of their character and a
race-blind society and so that you know
that's very appealing to you know people
like you and me you know 20th century
white guys um
and
and when i first heard the changing
definitions of racism i was very
skeptical of it and and you know
systemic racism is a difficult concept
and and
um
and
so i was i was
skeptical at first but what i've been
trying to do especially since the since
the george floyd killing um is
is
listen
um expose myself to different webs of
meaning um
because okay so here's here's one of the
other basic principles of moral
psychology intuitions come first
strategic reasoning second and you have
to actually open your heart first before
you can think new thoughts
and i think the george floyd video and
the many other videos have affected
white americans and opened their hearts
in ways
that you know could have happened in
previous waves but but didn't
and i just want to add that from my own
transformation the the big experience
the big thing that happened to me was um
i was invited on this so congressman
john lewis leads this uh civil rights
pilgrimage every
every march or april
um to uh to selma montgomery uh to the
site sites in alabama
and uh with it takes a bunch of congress
people from both parties and i was
invited along you know i study more
psychology i know some of the people on
the trip um and we went to the museums
uh uh in in montgomery uh and the you
know the you learn all of you really see
these powerful exhibits about
about slavery and family separation and
uh and um and the the the monument this
incredibly powerful
uh monument that you walk through about
lynching and so you have this incredibly
um emotionally powerful experiences
where it opens your heart and it's done
in a way it's not demonizing it's not
shaming and blaming it's inviting you to
understand
what happened what america did to
to to black people over all these
centuries and that it wasn't just long
ago um that it went
up well into the 20th century and and we
heard a talk from brian stevenson who we
helped us understand you know it's not
that it's not that slavery ended it
changed form it's not the jim crow and
did it change his form and yes there's
progress of course but
but to but to have this experience
it opened my heart to at least now
okay now i can let me let me let me hear
the arguments let me hear what you're
saying
and so
um
i think the idea
the the idea that we were talking about
before just oh you know colorblind let's
just treat everybody the same
um
you know i'm now much more open to the
idea
that that might be a fine you know end
game that we might get to someday
but but that for now
we do have to pay attention to to race
uh we do have to
um we do have to change things
about our society
that lead to different outcomes now as
to whether it's wise to call it racism
structural racism because that word then
makes people you know especially white
people say well no no um you know that's
a separate question
um
but i just want to say that i think the
truth you know one of the big changes of
this month of june
is that we saw
we saw
a big change in america in
in in its in the hearts of many many
people many white people in particular
so i think
yeah we have to be careful talking about
these concepts we have to start with
empathy it's so hard to find the truth
it's hard to understand each other so i
think we have to seek out opportunities
to open our hearts first and then we can
talk about these difficult complicated
ideas
and how do you think about finding the
path word because hearing you talk it is
very obviously measured it's very
reasonable i think it's very in line
with the truth of the human condition
you talk about the writer and the
elephant you know the elephant being the
emotion the writer being sort of the
intellect
and the intellect will make all kinds of
justifications to explain
why you're feeling what you're feeling
when in truth you're just being driven
by what you feel and i think that having
leading with empathy is
so self-evidently the right way to march
forward
but when i think about okay well how do
we begin to
make that the sticky web of meaning
that's shared by everybody because what
i see what i see being born out of
really beautiful ideas is something that
will metastasize or probably already has
metastasized and so it's like how do we
keep
an idea that has really beautiful
sentiment like let's really understand
where somebody's at where they're coming
from the historical context all of that
makes all the sense in the world to me
but then how do we make sure that it
doesn't metastasize and become shaming
and blaming and us versus them
like the the sort of scary way that
people have a reputational gun put to
their head to
to not i mean you you started the
heterodox academy to get people to have
these varying opinions and come together
there is at least from a very vocal
minority an excruciatingly um
aggressive
stance that either get in line or be
ostracized that's right so that's right
this is my my big fear is that we are
set up for to make major moral progress
but there's a good chance that is that
we're gonna have such backfire effects
and
um
the you know one of the messages that we
got on the trip to alabama was the power
of
uh the power of love as opposed to hate
obviously this was very much king's
message um but it was that if you want
to win people over
you have to appeal to them as as human
beings you shouldn't uh
you shouldn't be uh you know attacking
people tends to not win them over
and
um so this is
i think we're at very high risk of this
there's research in social psychology on
on diversity training
and um
there's not really any form of diversity
training that's been shown to work well
to actually change people to improve
relationships to
to create an inclusive environment but
there is evidence of what backfires and
when you take the shaming blaming
approach
um there's a there's a review paper in
science i think it's called scientific
diversity interventions but it says very
clearly that when you when you do
shaming blaming it tends to affect the
especially the white men it tends to
actually produce a backfire effect and
so
um i think there's a lot of of good will
towards change but there's a lot of fear
and i fear that and i'm i i what i see
like i think i think is what you're
getting at is that a lot of companies
they're going to be doing things where
everyone's going to be saying like yes
yes but but privately they have
different feelings and a lot of what
a lot of the change we're going to be
wrestling with might backfire so i don't
know what's going to happen i do know
that right now our country and our media
ecosystem is very well set up for us to
polarize everything misunderstand
everything and hate each other more
yeah that that's really my concern is i
come at everything again like this is
not something i think that i have deep
wisdom on i
but the way that i think goes like this
everything starts with your goal so what
are you trying to achieve and then
basically from there it's what i call
the physics of progress which definitely
rhymes with the scientific method so
you've got and and i just got this from
business but it i think applies to every
area of your life but if you want to
move forward in business you have to say
okay what's my goal what am i trying to
achieve like really specifically
and then what is my informed hypothesis
to overcome whatever problem is between
where i'm at now and actually achieving
that goal and then you have to have some
set of data that you're going to say
this is what we're going to look at to
see whether or not that we've made
progress and if you're making progress
awesome keep doing it but if you're not
making progress like you need to
acknowledge that and adjust course and
where i feel like and this is why i feel
like the right goal to have
like you said like there there are um
there are problems between where we are
and how we get there 100
but we have to decide where are we
actually trying to get to and the the
thing that i am
i don't yet see the wisdom and like you
i'm open man i am open i just want what
works where everybody has the
opportunity to have the raddest life
possible
so
if if we agree that our goal is to make
race like hair color and that it's
essentially irrelevant
that seems like it would bypass some of
the backfire problems that you're
talking about some of the more
the the problems of
homogeneity when you start talking about
thinking and how that creates a weakness
in and of itself and that you need these
competing ideas
versus what i'll say is sort of the
competing goal which i feel is right now
far stickier which is that race is so
important that every moment that we're
interacting with somebody we need to
hold
selma in our mind we need to be thinking
about
slavery and like that just needs to be
how we approach the world and that's the
only way to get beyond that and i'm
actually open like if that really is the
truth and that really is the thing that
takes us to a more beautiful society on
the other side of it then i'm open to
that i just don't see any evidence
how it's being deployed now like that's
actually what's going to happen and i'm
worried that we're
not clear about
what's on the other side of that like
what's our end state that we want to get
to because if everybody was like look
the end state is race is like hair color
okay cool i'm down for that um
i haven't yet heard a strict
articulation of that and so i i do worry
that we don't share a goal
as a society that there's more division
being born of the current tactics that
are being deployed so even if everybody
has a beautiful end state in mind if we
don't articulate what it is agree on
what it is and then have some sort of
metric that will judge progress against
we could be in a spiral a negative
spiral yeah i'm not sure that the the
universally desired end state would be
that race is no more meaningful than
hair color um yeah i i think a better
approximation would be um equal
opportunity which we all agree on but
then equal dignity which is what where i
think we're really well we're falling
short on both but especially equal
dignity i'm not sure that it's to make
race
you know irrelevant to everything it's
it's um
uh it's to erase the
the the barriers to well equal
participation opportunity and dignity
um
businesses business is pragmatic in a
way that the academy often is not and so
i'm at least hopeful that in the coming
year there'll be a lot of different
approaches tried
and some
might backfire and some might work
so i don't know what's what's coming um
there will be a lot of attention to
these issues in organizations of all
sorts
i'm hopeful that there will be an
experimental method tried that people
will collect data that people will
gradually innovate and figure out what
actually works
but it's possible that we won't
yeah it's interesting when you start
thinking about
conversations taking on a religious
tenor and you talk about the difference
in the
moral foundations
how can we begin to facilitate a more
constructive dialogue and you said a
while ago you were like you know when
you go to try to convince somebody of
something yeah what is what is that
process like how do we do that in a way
that is uniting and not divisive
so the the first principle of moral
psychology i think i said before was
intuitions come first strategic
reasoning second and that goes along
with the metaphor that i that i
developed in the happiness hypothesis
that the mind is divided like a small
rider which is our conscious reasoning
on a very large elephant which is all
the automatic intuitive and emotional
processes in our minds
and so you might think that the writer
is in control and tells the element what
to do but in fact most of our lives the
elephant is sort of running the show and
the writer is just up there like making
excuses you know coming up with
justifications in many ways the the the
rider serves the elephant
and so if you want to persuade someone
the basic rule is talk to the elephant
first
you you have to
you have to appeal to the elephant
appeal automatic processes this is why
story is important narrative making
appeals that that are well grounded in
that person's moral foundations
and the most powerful technique of all
is acknowledge something that they're
right about
in any argument so just think about
think about an argument you have with
your spouse or with a good friend or a
family member
you know if you start it right in with
you're wrong and here's why well i
guarantee you you're not going to win
that argument like you're not going to
persuade them of why they're wrong
but if you start off with why is that
i'm super curious what is it
psychologically that causes people to
just be so i agree that it happens but
what makes people so resistant to facing
being wrong oh well you know our our
minds have certain sort of like
functional patterns and we can be in a
mindset for combat we're very good at
that um we can be in a mindset for
exploration
you know exploration and learning um we
can be in a mindset for a ritual so we
have all these different mindsets that
we can get into
and
you know in the academic world what we
want is our students to spend all their
time in the exploration and learning
mindset not in the you know team versus
team combat mindset
uh and that's why i think you know
politics can often have a corrupting
effect on on learning and you know id
you know ideology and orthodoxy you know
they narrow your mind and they make you
see intellectual life as a battle
you know battle between teams rather
than
you know a kid in a candy shop like oh
what's that oh wow what's that let me
try that um
so
uh so if you think about people being in
different mindsets and then you approach
your spouse with you know you're wrong
and here's why or you know i'm so upset
about that thing you said to me well
that you know right away they're using
all their you know all their mental
power to to to show why you're wrong and
why they're right
the the writer is very good at conscious
you know right regarded as conscious
reasoning and if the writer is told find
a defense you know here comes the attack
get you know batten down the hatches
prepare a counter attack
then it's going to go in a very
predictable way
um but one thing i learned from one of
my favorite books dale carnegie how to
win friends and influence people i read
it
went around my first year of grad school
at penn
was
start with acknowledgement
say something you know you know honey um
we had that argument yesterday and i've
been thinking and you know
i think you're right about acts you know
i think you know about this one thing
that you criticized me for i've got to
admit you were right about that
now if the thing that you most care
about is why
it's a really good strategy to search
for something that you really were wrong
about because there almost certainly is
something
and if you can start by saying you know
you were right about x
that right away takes the other person
out of you know conflict resistance
battle mode
and puts them more into sort of you know
reciprocity oh
you know now i you acknowledge you know
you acknowledge something that i was
saying you've heard me i feel heard i
feel validated now i'm much more willing
to say
yeah you know on why i you know
i can see your side or or maybe i was
overreacting on what so so this is the
technique this is the basic technique to
make progress in human relationships is
really try to understand the other
person how they see it and find
something that they're right about there
usually is
yeah that that's a very good piece of
advice especially for marriages um
my wife and i have been together and
we've been together now for almost 20
years we've been married um 18 years and
one thing that i always tell people is
when you have something hard to say you
want to make sure that you wait for a
moment where their guard is down because
when man when people put up their
defenses it like you said we're we're
we have
evolved to be very good at coalescing
into groups
groups around something that's sacred an
idea or whatever and being able to mount
that defense and groups that were able
to mount that defense and overcome the
quote unquote enemy were more uh they
thrived and so we're going to be the
descendants of the people who are very
good at warding off whatever a physical
attack a mental attack and so
understanding how people throw up their
defenses and how to bring them down
is
really important and when i think about
you know some of the leaders of old that
i
i wish that we had right now during this
time to help us through
you know this crisis and to get us to
the other side in in a way that's
beautiful and i love the use of the word
dignity to you know really help
everybody
have a degree of dignity um when i read
nelson mandela's long walk to freedom
and understood his policies coming out
of um
such just on yeah unimaginable
obviously racism oppression like just
just it's crazy and the fact that he was
saying unity at this point is is all
that matters and really really
understood some deep things about human
psychology about bringing groups
together and i think the probably the
right i'm so curious to hear what you
think about this the
you quoted in the uh in one of your
talks anyway when when somebody draws a
circle to exclude me i draw a larger
circle to include them and that was very
much nelson mandela's philosophy of like
how do we find the things that are in
common in fact one of the things you
said that i really resonated with was
we've got to get people to focus on
similarities like and i have
a thing i think about when building
one's own mind which is your whatever
you look at you're going to see more of
um you know there's nothing either good
or bad but thinking makes it so
and if you're
focused on the things that divide us
you're going to see them everywhere but
if you focus on the things that unite us
that can be a powerful way forward
does that still ring true to you
well yes yes i mean what um
you know i think the technique the
technique that works over and over again
uh whether it be you know mandela or or
king or gandhi um is you know to bring
about social change you you do need to
apply pressure and they all were masters
at applying economic pressure political
pressure you're not going to win
just by persuasion and beautiful words
but
if ultimately you do need to persuade
large numbers of people
then humanizing them rather than
demonizing them is likely to be more
effective unfortunately our instinct is
often to demonize and i think it's much
worse nowadays because
people raised in a social media
environment
are not necessarily trying to persuade
the person that they're interacting with
they're doing things to signal out
sideways to all the people in their
community all the people who are going
to like or follow enough whatever who
are gonna
that's what matters to them and i've
heard this from a couple of of uh
of leaders in non-profit spaces recently
the pressures that they felt um to make
statements the pressures that they felt
from their young employees it's it
seemed not driven by
a desire to actually you know um
do something constructive for real but
by the urgent pressure to satisfy the
demands on social media to do something
now
so
uh you know this is what
so right once again the the
media environment the social media
environment makes it harder for us to
have authentic communication
and it plays up the importance of sort
of a more defensive signaling you know
what have i liked what have i said i'll
be judged oh my god i better say
something now
um
so yeah i am i am alarmed uh the quote
by the way the quote that you gave
before uh was from paulie murray a civil
rights uh activist a
a woman
african-american woman
minister and lawyer
at yale
at any rate yeah when my brothers uh
draw a circle to exclude me i shall draw
a larger circle to include them that's
the common humanity approach uh and
that's what lowers people's guards and
that's what invites them in and i hope
that we'll find ways to do that going
forward
yeah one thing that and admittedly i
have not done this but i'm always so
intrigued by people who have is
psychedelics
and the ability to expand your mind to
lower the sense of ego to connect to
other people
i'd love to talk about that specifically
and then i'd also love to talk about
just how do you invite like
disconfirming evidence into your world
oh boy let's see how much more time do
we have we're uh
you know that's those are two very big
topics
um
i guess we'll just do okay just you know
very briefly on on the psychedelics um
that is one of the categories when i
when i started studying the hive switch
um
that is one of the category you know
psychedelic experience is one of the
categories that i was thinking of um
and uh you know in the last year i've
begun to
speak as it was michael pollan's book um
about psych about psychedelics coming
out you know a lot more people begin to
speak out about their own experiences
and it i i first tried psychedelics in
um was in 1993 when i was a postdoc at
the university of chicago
and had a lot of the classic experience
that people talk about loss of ego a
sense that everything is one resolution
of contradictions
and i and i began to read everything i
could about the experience and try to
understand how is this potential
possible and how is it that i just had
this experience
that is so similar to what many people
have described as religious experiences
uh all these other um self-transcendent
experiences
and
i i you know i do think that um that
psychedelic experiences can be very very
helpful
in helping people turn down the moral
it's the binary thinking
and i wonder
i suspect that it was in part those
experiences
because i then had a bunch of them in
1993 i got so interested um you know i
do wonder whether that prepared me
later to be better at understanding
you know left and right and multiple
moral perspectives i think you know it's
what i study and so i can't know whether
it's because i study it and read it or
whether it's because i had these
incredibly powerful experiences when i
was about 30. um i don't know
but i yeah i do think that
they're they're very valuable and
thrilled that they're being studied
again
with careful experiments they're being
studied for their use in in
psychotherapy they're showing very good
promise as they did in the 60s before
the research was stopped
so that's where i'm coming from tell me
why you ask
um i am very
passionate about the idea of that your
your mind is incredibly malleable so
call it 50 hardwired 50 malleable and
the amount that you can change your life
based on changing the part that's
malleable
that you need to be very thoughtful
about how you
change the part that you can change to
make sure that it's moving in a
productive direction but the
things that can give you quick access to
something i find very interesting and
the number of reports that i've heard
from people where they talk about the
disillusion of the ego they talk about
connection ah a sense of touching the
divine sam harris's thing of you know
imagine reaching into your
right pocket with your left hand or
whatever it was and pulling out the
andromeda galaxy yeah like there's
something yeah so so cool and there's
there is something
every truly transformative moment in my
life has felt like i was punching
through a veil and you realize oh my god
like these walls that i thought were
caging you ripped through and on and a
it was like paper thin and so now when
you're on the other side you're like
jesus i'm reorienting myself to
something entirely different and this is
that so that's the core mission of my
life right is i want people to
understand that
no matter where you are no matter what
situation you're in you can
improve your skill set which is my
obsession you can improve your skill set
and get a different outcome and that to
me was so liberating because i didn't
start there i started in a place where i
felt like i was born with a certain
level of intelligence a certain skill
set and that was that and that my talent
and intelligence were fixed traits and
then i could never go any further
and then i began to encounter ideas for
reading and meeting people where it was
like that's so [__] like you can
change and my favorite quote on the
topic is you can't make a racehorse out
of a pig but you can make a really fast
pig
and so even if all you can do is like
10x or 100x your life you're never going
to be the greatest of all time at
whatever you're pursuing but that you
can get so much better that it has this
marked impact on your life and then also
i think that real progress is a
foundational pillar to happiness to
fulfillment maybe is a better way to
think of it
and so that was one of the veils that
i've punched through in my own life come
through to the other side i'm like oh my
god i'm in control i can do the things
that i want to do i can get better i
have limitations sure but i don't even
think about those it's like my
limitations are so far away that to
engage with the world as if i had none
is far more instructive far more
liberating far more interesting and so i
went from sliding towards depression to
punching through that very thin membrane
into this whole new world which has
changed every aspect of my life how i
feel about myself right so in the
happiness hypothesis you talk about
there are three in-betweens as you call
them you need to get right between you
and others between you and your work and
between you and something bigger than
yourself and i'll add another one which
you may hate or may say is already
encompassed but between you and yourself
and
when i change my relationship to my
narrative and what i told myself about
myself and i stopped telling myself that
i was smart which is very fragile and i
started telling myself that i'm the
learner which is anti-fragile that the
more i [__] up and fail and people
attack and tell me i'm dumb the better i
get because i go okay cool i'm blind in
that way now i can improve upon that
so when i hear people talk about
psychedelics and they talk about
punching through some veil and that they
get to bring that back with them
and the only reason i haven't done it is
fear legalities fear of um [__] up my
brain fear of a bad trip like those are
the legitimate easier
um but i'm i am committed
to doing mdma with my wife i think that
would be [__] amazing uh i really i'm
i'm actively excited to do that and if
it were legal i would have already done
it um so
that's why wow
tom that was that was a kind of a
meta narrative about narrative that was
like your life story
told with a structure that had a real
low point and then a sort of a
triumphant up from the low point you had
all kinds of metaphors in there that was
great i mean you could organize that
into your autobiography right there but
that was that was a beautiful story
well thank you yeah so that's why i'm
interested in that the other part of it
which is just heterodox thinking in
general um i
i am so there's a quote that governs a
huge portion of my life which is genius
is a young man's game
jonathan when i heard that it really
upset me it was one of those where it
was like i lost sleep that night like it
really [__] with me because i was i i
have always been a late bloomer i wanted
to get into film in in my early 20s and
ended up on a 15-year sort of sojourn to
learning how to control my life and
build wealth and was just like have i
am i now too old and
one of the the saving graces was this
guy who said um i think he's won two
nobel prizes i i could be conflating
stories i fully admit that but here's
how i replay it in my head a guy who won
two nobel prizes in different
disciplines said that the the places
that he's won these nobel prizes were in
areas that overlapped it so chemistry
and biology or i don't remember what the
real ones were but you know economics
and chemistry whatever and he said every
10 years he had just forced himself to
reinvent himself
and that gave me this rope of like when
you
the reason that people calcify
is they're young they don't know any
better they're sort of born of that
moment they have wonderful amounts of
naivete of arrogance and just enough
knowledge and skill set to really be
brash and do something and when it pays
off it's [__] amazing and we call it
genius now the problem is you begin to
trap yourself and they're just
assumptions that you've made that you
think are truth and you don't realize
their assumptions and because you can
never clear them from your field of view
because you're not even necessarily
aware of them you don't make that
progress and so my thing was always
um and and the person who gave words to
it um was
ray dalio
and ray dalio who's just a brilliant
thinker said
how do i know i'm right and you don't
want to live in a state of paralysis
where you think everything you think is
wrong but at the same time you want to
constantly check yourself and say how do
i know that i'm right so i seek
disconfirming evidence in my life and so
i and i do that to stay
psychologically nimble so that i
recognize the assumptions i made that
may be wrong that don't take me where i
want them to take me so when i meet
somebody like you that i know i mean you
literally started an organization around
heterodox thinking
i'm just always intrigued if there's a
better way that i could be doing it so i
wonder how you you know is it just
seeking authors is it youtube you know
what's the method yeah
well given that our minds are so good at
confirming what we want to believe
um
you have to find someone to critique you
you have to find someone who can do what
you can't do for yourself which is
challenge your confirmation biases um
and so the you know one of the most
brilliant writers on this is john stuart
mill um we have a version of his
his book on liberty chapter two we have
a version of it at heterodoxacademy.org
mill
[Music]
and you know one of the famous lines
from it is he who knows only his own
side of the case knows little of that
an amazing thing happens when you ask
people to make you smarter when you say
to people what am i doing wrong what
have i missed um it's amazing they'll do
it for you they'll tell you i watched uh
preparing to talk with you i watched
your recent interview with adam grant
who really exemplifies this you know
adam see you know seeks out criticism
what am i doing wrong so
um if you you know you can you can be
defensive and try to guard your
reputation and and you know always you
know show that you're right but then you
don't grow you don't learn you don't
become more competent
or
you can have a lifelong habit of seeking
out
asking people to make you better asking
people to
to critique you now you know a place
like twitter can be an awful place
there's no relationship there's
anonymity so i don't want to say just
put yourself out there and let people
you know be savage towards you but it
but in the right context and that's part
of what we're after with heterodox
academy is universities are the right
context the university is like the ideal
place where people come together
to discuss ideas to learn and if as long
as you have a range of viewpoints and
people don't all start with the same
starting assumptions then people will
come out of that class smarter they'll
come out better able to think about
complicated uh complicated difficult
questions and um
you know what what we what we've seen
is that the university environment has
lost a lot of its intellectual diversity
over the last 20 or 30 years and more
places now you know there are many
different universities there are many
parts of the universe that i don't want
to over generalize but
um but in general
you know there is data showing that
there's been a decline in the viewpoint
uh the diversity of professors certainly
and some increase in students saying
that they're afraid to speak up they're
afraid to challenge opinions
and so
you get bad thinking you get fear you
get people in this defensive mindset the
key phrase we hear a lot is walking on
eggshells one student
deb masik is the woman who runs hederax
academy she she had been a professor at
harvey mudd college
and she said one of her students said to
her my motto is silence is safer
think about that think about going
through college with the motto just
keep quiet you won't get any trouble
like wow
that's really sad
so
uh yes that's one of the things that
we're working on is how do you create a
vibrant open environment in which people
with diverse viewpoints do each other
the favor
of arguing civilly and constructively
yeah do each other the favor that's so
important and this goes back to
man what you said is is one of the sort
of key pillars of my life
open your heart right so i always tell
people when when you're i'm and i'm
usually talking in context of uh
marriage but i say you have to want the
other person to win like you you've got
to like feel
you have to fill your heart with love
which is what i would say and even to me
that sounds dumb because i just don't
have the better words
um about you know tapping into uh
compassion or something in your mind i'm
not sure what's actually going on
neurologically but what it feels like is
that you fill your heart with love and
from that position which changes
the the very frame of reference from
which you're approaching the world in
that moment like and getting people to
understand frame of reference is
everything and how quickly you can sort
of step in and out of different frames
of reference there jordan peterson
called them micro personalities i
thought that's so astute it it carries
like all this weight with it in terms of
when you step into that personality but
filling your heart with love and then
engaging from that perspective and when
you get somebody who's reciprocating
that and you're both like
really sharing something um to be
generous to uh you know be open like hey
i i think you're wrong about this let me
lay out why i think that let me hear how
you think i'm wrong like and when you
get people that are doing that it's so
rad um and i love that the most and part
of what bums me out now is is there's so
much bludgeoning right like when you see
people screaming at each other and it's
like
the only thing i can tell you is i'm not
even sure who's right uh just no one's
gonna listen like you're you're forcing
people to put their defenses up even
just yelling at somebody
makes them feel like oh [__] this is
like fight or flight this is you can
feel that that anxiety bubbling up in
you which is going to have weird [__]
consequences it's pulling the blood
literally pulling the blood out of your
prefrontal cortex and
you know and when you you approach
something like that it's like this is
bound to lose but what you're dealing
with is like everybody has good
intentions i'll even grant them that i i
may be wrong but i think i'm probably
wrong only a little bit of the time like
most of the time people are really
coming at something with that level of
intensity because they believe like yo i
have the way forward i know what we need
to be doing you're gonna [__] it up and
now it just like keeps ratcheting it up
which is why i'm so worried about how
the [__] do you unwind all this stuff
where there's so much agitation so much
us versus them
it's no
that's right that's that's where we are
now so um you know i think maybe some
parting words i do i do have to move on
in in a minute um
but i think some parting words are that
because that is the where we are um i
think it's incumbent on all of us to go
easier on each other um
we we are you know it's that we're
caught in a in a game in which you know
fighting and and and really cruelty are
sometimes incentivized
and we've got to figure this out
together we've got to heal our country
our democracy is in big big trouble
um i'm very hopeful i think we'll change
after the next election will have a
chance to to really
um to reconcile
across political lines across racial
lines
but
it's it's it's going to require us all i
think to to go easier on each other give
each other benefit the doubt assume good
intent until you see evidence otherwise
and
recognize just how hard it is to find
the truth
so
we have to all tone down our certainty
that i think is the way we live in the
post-babble age
those are some brilliant final words
jonathan thank you so much for joining
me man guys if you haven't followed this
guy read his books you will love them
the most if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
when you're you're trying to innovate in
an industry you can't be completely
clueless about what everybody else is
doing otherwise you might miss something
really important um and yes blockbuster
sears blackberry i'm talking to you
kodak but
uh on the other hand if you're too
obsessed with what your competitors are
up to then you you get entrenched and
it's harder to see with fresh eyes